i want to talk to you guys a little bit
about our coaching program
and mental health in general and like
what's going on with the world
and what's going on with us why are we
sad why are we stuck
why are we depressed why are we lonely
all this stuff we're just going to talk
about it for a few minutes
and just think a little bit about what
healthy gamer does as an organization
so first thing to consider is that
mental health is getting worse
all over the world it's now surpassed
cardiovascular disease
and cancer in terms of causing the most
morbidity and mortality
which means that the cost of mental
health in terms of like lost work days
and
impairing like people's education and
stuff like that
as well as mortality is now worse than
cancer and cardiovascular disease
so like what's going on there right why
is like why is mental health getting
worse like isn't the world getting
better like aren't we like advancing as
society and
sure in some ways but why is that
so mental health is getting worse right
now and what our society does to deal
with that is essentially like
psychiatric treatment right
so if you have a mental illness then you
should go see a psychiatrist or
therapist and then they'll help
you with that and that's certainly true
and i'm a psychiatrist so i'm a big
believer in psychiatric treatment
but i think part of the problem is that
somewhere along the way
mental stress became like illness and
what i mean by that is that if we think
about like depression right
so an illness is something that when
you're like body or brain
does something that it's not supposed to
that's ill
so it's like a malfunction of your mind
or your brain
and sometimes something like depression
can be caused by a malfunction
sometimes what happens is when when
people feel like
lost or they feel depressed or they feel
stuck
it's not like a malfunction it's not
like their life is actually going
wonderful
and something in their brain tells them
that they're awful human beings
that's what real clinical illness looks
like it's like
if you think about someone like
schizophrenia for example you know
there isn't a whole lot of evidence that
the devil is possessing the people
around them but that's what they believe
it's like their mind is not congruent
with with reality
the challenge that we face nowadays is
that
a lot of our depression is actually
congruent with reality
especially if you look at like gen z and
millennials like the world that we live
in
and the reality that we face is actually
depressing
if you're 23 years old and like
struggling to find a job
and feel alone and like don't know what
to do with yourself
and don't know like where to go
how to put your life together how to
find motivation
that's not an illness like there isn't
some part of your brain that's like
malfunctioning that's just
that's life and so this is the problem
right is because then like you have a
generation of people like us who get
told oh like you're mentally ill
so go see a psychiatrist or therapist
and then you go see a psychiatrist and
therapist
and they diagnose you with depression
they start you on a on a pill and they
send you home and then you like play
video games all day
browse reddit watch youtube whatever
like it doesn't
and the pill doesn't fix your life
because that's not
what it does and so the first issue is
that like sure mental health is getting
worse in this country and like
psychiatrists and therapists
are not cutting yet that's been my
experience as a psychiatrist
so let's just think about so the average
age of a psychiatrist is older than 50
years old
right so if you go to them and you say
yeah like
you know you're talking to them about
like twitch like they're not gonna
understand what you're talking about
the second thing is that sometimes it
can take months like two months three
months four months to see a psychiatrist
or therapist
it can be quite expensive so therapists
will cost
anywhere from like a hundred to four
hundred dollars per session
psychiatrists will charge anywhere
between like
200 for a 30 minute appointment up to
like
400 or 500 at least in the united states
you know they don't understand gaming
they don't understand social media they
don't understand like fomo and things
like that right they're going to
diagnose you with edible complexes and
depression
psychiatry is too old too slow
and too effective ineffective
it just doesn't work well it's just it's
just not doesn't work great
and so this is why we started our
coaching program
because a lot of what you guys struggle
with is not
illness but is like actually congruent
with reality
that you don't know what you're doing
with your life you don't know what your
purpose is you don't know how to get
control of your life you play too many
video games
you struggle with depression you
struggle with anxiety etc right that's
that's why we started the coaching
program to help you with all of those
things
because the story that i heard time and
time and time again
so when i started when i appeared on the
internet in a while dr k appeared
i would tell people hey man like you
should go see a therapist bro like they
can help you with the depression men
and then what i the the story that i got
back was i did go see a therapist
and i spent like two weeks talking to
them and they had no clue what was going
on
like with me like they didn't understand
anything
they were like just stop playing just
like play video games less bro
that's that's what they got right so a
lot of psychiatric treatment just hasn't
been affected
this is actually known in the
psychiatric literature so i'm going to
show you guys something okay
so the journal of the american medical
association antidepressant drug effects
and depression severity
a patient-level meta-analysis here's the
main thing that i want to show you guys
okay
so this is a good paper published in a
reputable journal
okay among so this is a scale
this is a depression scale the hamilton
d
depression scale cohen d effect sizes
for the difference between medication
and placebo were estimated to be less
than 20
what this means is that antidepressant
medication
has a less than 20 percent improvement
compared to placebo so like the effect
size of antidepressant medication
is less than 20 in this meta-analysis
done in the journal of the american
medical association
okay estimates of the magnitude of
superior superiority
of medication over placebo increased
with increases in baseline depression
severity
so what that means is that the more
depressed you are
the more medication helps but on average
it's a it's a less than 20
improvement and let's think about why
this would be
and i think the reason for this is
because when people go to
a psychiatrist when they're depressed
not all of them are mentally ill
so the pill works if you have a
neurochemistry imbalance but a lot of
people just have
like a congruent depression it's like a
depression that
fits with what's going on with your life
right now you should be depressed you're
not mentally ill
your life is just going nowhere so
that's why you're bummed man so let's
look
at another paper okay so this is the new
england journal of medicine
the most reputable medical journal in
the world
so what this paper is talking about is
the idea that antidepressants are like
not as effective as
as we think they are so what this means
is that if you look at
according to the published literature so
studies on antidepressants
it appeared that 91 94
of trials were positive so if you look
at all of the studies on antidepressant
medication 94
of them are positive but if you look at
fda analysis
so this is all of the data that was
submitted to the fda
that not necessarily published you know
so like if a drug company does a trial
they have to submit their data to the
fda
but they don't have to publish it fda
analysis only 51 percent of trials are
positive and so if you look at the
effect size of antidepressant medication
was anywhere between 11 and 69
11 to 69 for drugs and 32
overall so one study tells us that
antidepressant medication is less than
improvement the this study shows us that
generally speaking antidepressant is 32
improvement so it's like 20 to 30
percent and why is that it's because
lots of depressed or sad people are
going to see psychiatrists and they're
being given pills and the pill doesn't
fix it because not everyone has a
neurochemistry imbalance
so psychiatry is like we're struggling
we're failing you guys are going to
psychiatric offices
and then they're giving everyone
medications not everyone but a lot of
psychiatrists
are primarily what we call
psychopharmacologists so they see
patients for 15 to 20 minutes
per visit they'll see three to four
patients per hour and they primarily
prescribe medication
and the improvement that they're giving
people is 20 to 32
so something is not working right the
system is not working
the best that we have to offer and this
is me too like i'm [ __ ]
faculty at harvard medical school and
like when i prescribe an antidepressant
medication
it's not like my numbers are better my
numbers are still 20 to 30
that's just how it is so like what's
wrong
so this is cool so somewhere along the
way what someone realized is that like
okay if someone has a problem you can
take a well-trained psychiatrist who has
never
lived a day in the life of that person
and try to give them like
expert knowledge but if you really want
to help people
it turns out that people who have actual
experience are actually effective at
helping people so this is where peer
delivered recovery support services come
in
so on one end of the spectrum we have
psychiatrists
so these are like highly trained
individuals
that have never really experienced
addiction
and on the other hand of the spectrum we
have aaa sponsors like alcoholics
anonymous sponsors
who have lived it with addiction their
entire life but have no formal training
and so what happened is someone had this
like brilliant idea like what if we take
aaa sponsors
and we start training them we give them
something like a training of what a
psychiatrist has
and a peer delivered a peer support
specialist was born
and it turns out that this is an
effective and
and cost effective and treatment size
effective intervention that if you take
someone who's lived with something like
video game addiction or alcohol
addiction
and you put them through training and
you equip them to help another human
being
a combination of their personal
experience plus formal training is
actually very effective
so there are a lot of methodological
limitations so this study is from 2015
so there's more data on this
now the body of evidence suggests
salutatory effects on
participants there are better papers
that sort of suggest that
peer support interventions work so this
is where our coaching program was born
so it was born from a couple of ideas
the first is that
what holds us back in life and why we
feel
depressed or anxious isn't necessarily a
medical illness and doesn't necessarily
need a medical intervention right so
what our coaches target is like how do
you find
motivation how do you stop
procrastinating how do you overcome
like feelings of like game uh guilt or
shame
right how do you stop playing video
games how do you understand yourself
better so that you can play the game of
life better
that's what our coaching program is for
that's why it was built
it's because mental health is too old
too slow
too expensive and also mis-targeted
so our coaching program was developed
specifically because what i realized is
like
what we need is like an army of peer
support specialists we need an army of
people who understand what you've been
through
and then they need to learn like a
distillation
of the best of what like psychotherapy
techniques and motivational interviewing
and a couple of these other
evidence-based interventions and if we
can put those two things together
can they help so now what i'd like to do
is answer that question for you guys
so here is data from our coaching
program here
is the change
in purpose and meaning after
four weeks of group coaching so this is
group coaching personal coaching free
coaching
okay so after four weeks people have a
increase in a sense of purpose and
meaning after one month of group
coaching 14
increase after eight weeks and 20
increase
in purpose and meaning after 12 weeks of
group coaching
their sense of control over their life
increases by about nine percent
the negative effects of video games go
down by about eleven percent
the positive effects of video games go
down by about one percent
they have a 15 reduction in anxiety and
a 17
reduction in depression after 12 weeks
of group coaching so like
remember what's the effect size of
antidepressant medication on depression
do you guys remember
so personal coaching so this is
interesting right
so if we look at eight weeks of group
coaching
and eight weeks of personal coaching we
see that personal coaching
has a 20 improvement in meaning after
eight weeks
so these people get more than a six
percent versus seven percent
agency or control negative effects of
video games ten percent versus fourteen
percent
and this is pretty cool like they
actually enjoy video games more at the
eight week mark
the positive effects of video games are
actually improved which is something
that
really no one else looks at besides us
because the rest of the world just
thinks about video game addiction
er video games bad what i've come to
realize is that video games have
positive
good things and bad things about video
games 17 reduction in anxiety 17
reduction in depression now if you
compare the 12-week mark
right so group coaching catches up and
then theoretically even like
personal coaching drops down a little
bit
um at the 12-week mark we're not really
sure why that is
i think some of this may be sampling
bias which i can get into details but
but generally speaking group coaching
catches up to personal coaching at 12
weeks
and the other thing is i don't know if
you guys know this but about a third of
our coaching hours
are free coaching so we also looked at
free coaching
so this is pretty interesting right so
if you look at free coaching is personal
by the way
so our free coaching cohort actually
improves more than our paid coaching
cohort
so like the question that we wondered is
like is our free coaching
lower quality than our personal coaching
and it turns out that the answer
is no in theory it's maybe even superior
i don't i think there's some issues with
this data but
generally speaking it means that if
you're if you're a free coaching client
you're not getting the shaft
okay so don't worry about it the point
here though is that if you look at these
effect sizes like i mean all these like
numbers 19
versus 18 you know 19 here 14
here whatever the ballpark is that like
it's about 20
right like like there's about a 20
reduction
15 18 reduction 18
reduction 20 reduction like it's
somewhere around 20
so our our coaching program works so
people were wondering okay how do we
measure this so here's an example
of like the kinds of data we collect so
when we're trying to assess for
purpose or meaning we ask people does
your life
lack direction my life that lacks
direction my life has purpose i'm
excited to get out of bed in the morning
i have forward momentum in life i feel
stuck in life so like
these are the things that get 20 percent
better after eight weeks
and when you guys are thinking about
like 20 so i i know that
you know we make it sound like 20 isn't
very big but let me tell you as a
clinician a 20
improvement in depression is huge right
so just think about this like what if
you
you know you're you weighed 20 less
or 20 more than you do what if you were
20 taller or 20
shorter 20 is a big difference and
especially when it comes to something
like depression because
all it takes is like you to start moving
in the right direction for you to start
taking care of yourself better
so there's like a cumulative a 20
improvement
in meaning from week to week even if
it's a 20
increase if you have more meaning in
your life when you wake up if you're
excited to
if you're 20 more excited to get out of
bed every morning
that's going to be an effect that will
build up over the course of a year
and your life will start to change so
twenty percent
i'm happy with these are the kinds of
things so like this is like closer to a
ten percent improvement right
i'm too dis undisciplined to make
meaningful change
unfortunately we only help that by about
ten percent we're working on that by the
way we're working on improving our
intervention to help with this
right so this is the kind of data that
we collect so this is why we do coaching
and this is why we did this like we
started this whole thing because
because you all need help and is a
society
my profession and myself included or
failing you guys
psychiatry is failing y'all and that's
why we started this you know
this coaching program was built
on your support and so i i felt like it
was important to share with you guys
why we're doing what we're doing what
we're doing and
what the data looks like and and i hope
you guys it's kind of funny right
because
i mean we showed you the data like i
didn't sugarcoat anything like that's
the actual data and so there
are weird things in the data like
personal coaching like
you know purpose drops by one percent
from week eight to week 12. so like we
don't know what's going on there
i i don't really know um but that's the
actual data and i think our program is
successful and people
you know people are grateful for having
worked with a coach like their life
is starting to transform because of the
work that they do with their coach
and our coaches are highly dedicated
people
really smart because that's the thing
like we pull from our population right
so like gamers are smart
you give them like someone to help and
you say like hey
if you show up one hour a week and you
give
everything all of your attention all of
your compassion and all of your
intelligence
to one person you can make a difference
in their life
and our coaches wake up every day and
they like they knock it out of the park
and what they do is these are these are
noobs from the internet with a few
months of training
have effect sizes that are arguably
comparable
to the breakthrough drugs of like
big pharma right and it's like noobs
from the internet and it's because they
care and it's because they try
and it's because the kind of help that
we deliver
is actually design it's coaching it's
not medical treatment
it's not designed to treat depression
it's designed to like
help you move forward in life because
sometimes you guys may be depressed but
that doesn't mean you're mentally ill it
just means that
your life is like not that great right
now
so make it worth living and that's what
our coaches are there to help you do
they're there to help you understand how
you work
and so once you understand how you work
you can play the game of life
in the way that you want it's about
applying
self understanding to building the life
that you want to
and that's what we're doing and so thank
you guys very much